index
Type: Core concept
Category: Data storage and search

Definition:
In Splunk, an index is a repository where Splunk stores the data it ingests. When data comes into Splunk (such as log files, metrics, or event data), Splunk processes and organizes it into indexes so it can be searched efficiently. Each index contains events, metadata, and pointers that allow Splunk to retrieve the data quickly when you run a search.

Think of an index as a database or bucket where data of a certain type or purpose is stored. You can create multiple indexes to separate and organize data according to your needs — for example, by data source, department, or security level.

Purpose:
Indexes in Splunk serve these key functions:

Organize and store data in a structured way.

Improve search performance by limiting searches to specific data sets.

Support data retention policies (e.g., how long data is kept before it’s archived or deleted).

Help manage user permissions by restricting access to certain indexes.

How it works:
When data is ingested into Splunk:

Splunk parses the data, assigns a timestamp, and extracts metadata (such as host, source, sourcetype).

Splunk writes the data to an index.

Each index consists of directories and files on disk, including raw data files and index files (for fast lookups).

When you run a search, Splunk looks in the index or indexes you specify to find matching events.

Syntax in searches:
index=<index_name>

This tells Splunk which index to search. You can specify one index or use OR to search multiple indexes:
index=web OR index=firewall

If no index is specified in your search, Splunk uses the default index for your user role (often main).

Examples:

Search in the web index for 404 errors
index=web status=404

Search in multiple indexes
index=web OR index=firewall action=blocked

Search in a specific index and show only certain fields
index=firewall
| fields src_ip dest_ip action

Search all indexes you have permission to access
You can leave out index= but this is not recommended because it can slow down your search:
error OR failure

Default index:

The default index is often called main.

If you do not specify an index in your search, Splunk searches the default index set for your user role.

Best practices:

Always specify the index in your search when possible. This makes your searches faster and more efficient.

Organize data into separate indexes based on purpose, source, or retention needs.

Use index names that clearly indicate the type of data stored (for example, web, security, firewall).

Related concepts:

sourcetype: A tag that describes the format or type of data.

host: The system where the data originated.

source: The file or input source that provided the data.

Limitations:

You cannot modify the data inside an index using SPL — indexes are for storing and searching data only.

Once data is indexed, it cannot be changed (you would need to re-ingest corrected data).

Example combined usage:
index=web sourcetype=access_combined status=500
| stats count by uri_path

This searches the web index for web server errors (status 500) and counts how often each URI path appears.
